The ideation phase is often the most
exciting part of the Design Thinkingprocess
and kicks the creative process into high
gear. This phase represents an important
transition step from getting to know your users
and the problem to coming up with solutions.
The main goal of the ideation phase is to use
creativity and innovation to develop solutions.
In the ideation phase you explore and come up
with as many ideas as possible. At this stage,
the focus is on quantity of ideas rather than
quality. The goal is not to evaluate or assess
the viability of these ideas, but to keep the
creative and problem-solving juices flowing.
The main goal is to discover and explore new
angles and avenues. To think outside the box,
question the obvious, challenge the
norm and come up with new ideas.
Ideation sessions help you question assumptions,
think outside the box, and explore uncharted
territory. When done right, an ideation
session is where innovation thrives.
But it's not always easy to facilitate an
ideation session. They need a lot of preparation
and concentration from team members in order  to be
fruitful. So before we dive deeper into specific
ideation techniques, let's take a look at how we
can prepare for a successful ideation session.
Change of environment. In ideation sessions it
is important to create the right environment
to stimulate out-of-the-box thinking.
Therefore, get away from the office and
hold your session in a brand new place.
This creates new incentives, which in
turn can help initiate new ways of thinking.
Create a relaxed environment. Another reason
not to sit in the office. The best idea sessions
are those where the participants feel comfortable
and safe. Provide icebreakers to bring the group
together and warm up to the creative process.
No judgments. Ideation sessions are not the place
to argue or question other members' ideas. This is
a no-judgment zone and that rule should be clear
to everyone before a brainstorming session begins.
It is now about generating ideas, not
judging. So instead of blocking an idea,
you and your other team members are encouraged to
come up with your own ideas that stem from those
of the other members of your team.
So you can discover the best idea
without regard for hierarchy, seniority or ego.
There are no bad ideas. Every idea presented
should relate to and be relevant to the
problem, but otherwise no idea is a bad idea.
Encourage weird, crazy and wild ideas.
This process involves first drafting as
many ideas as possible which are later scaled
down until the best possible option remains.
Aim for quantity. Brainstorming is basically a
creative exercise, encouraging design thinkers to
let their imaginations run wild. At this stage,
the emphasis is more on quantity than quality.
Build on each other's ideas. One
idea usually flows from another.
Here new insights and perspectives can be
gained, which then lead to one's own ideas.
So the team will continue to build
ideas that will hopefully gradually
become more sophisticated and
focused on the central problem.
Apply structure. Although it is a creative
process, it helps the process if some
ground rules are put in place. Stick to one
conversation at a time and stay on topic.
Focus is essential, otherwise the process can
become confusing or you lose sight of the goal.
There are hundreds of ideation techniques
you can use to spark innovative ideas.
At the beginning of the ideation phase, it is good
to opt for techniques that stimulate as many ideas
as possible. At the end, you'll use techniques
that help you explore and test your ideas.
Also try out different techniques.
Different strategies can lead to new ideas.
Let's look at the most common ideation techniques.
Techniques you can use to generate as many ideas
as possible are brainstorm, analogies,
bodystorming, challenge assumptions,
mindmap, provocation, SCAMPER, sketching,
storyboarding and worst possible idea.
Techniques that help you select and test your
ideas are: dot voting, the four categories method,
now wow how matrix and
affinity maps.
The first ideas shared during the ideation
phase are often the most obvious ones.
Brainstorming is one of the best known methods
when it comes to generating new ideas as a group.
It helps to go beyond simple answers, question
assumptions, and think outside the box.
In a brainstorming session, you verbally
bounce ideas off each other in the hope of
finding a blended solution. It is a perfect
way to generate lots of ideas by using the
collective thinking of the group, talking to each
other, listening and building on other ideas.
These can then be refined and
narrowed down to the best solution.
Participants should be able to discuss their
ideas freely without fear of criticism.
To set up a brainstorming session,
you need a facilitator who can ensure that all
voices are heard and can lead the conversation.
There are also a few fun variations
on the traditional brainstorm:
Braindump is very similar to brainstorming,
but is done individually. The participants
write their ideas on post-it notes and share their
ideas with the group at a later stage. It is also
called silent brainstorming and is often done as a
preparatory step before the actual brainstorming.
Brainwriting is a version of brainstorming that
works well for more introverted participants.
Instead of sharing ideas verbally, participants
write down their ideas before passing them on to
someone else. The next person reads these ideas
and adds their own. You repeat this process until
everyone has contributed. The advantage of this
technique is that everyone can contribute equally
and not the people who normally dominate
the conversation or are verbally stronger.
When you're ready, you can put all the ideas
on the whiteboard and discuss them together.
Gamestorming is the gamification of
brainstorming and a popular ideation
technique. To increase involvement, energy
and collaboration during group sessions.
An example of a gamified ideation session
is: Fishbowl. An ideation session in which
participants sit in two circles, a smaller
one and a larger one around the smaller one.
Participants in the inner circle discuss their
ideas and brainstorm while participants in the
outer circle listen, observe and document the
ideas and talking points without saying a word.
This forces some to listen
and others to brainstorm.
The bodystorming technique lets you physically
experience a situation in order to gain new ideas.
Bodystorming allows participants to
approach potentially abstract problems
hands-on. It combines aspects of empathy,
brainstorming and prototyping in one exercise that
helps to stimulate more meaningful experiences.
And that is why this technique is sometimes
already applied in the empathy phase.
How does it work? You set up a physical
experience that resembles the problem you
are trying to solve, using people,
props, or a digital prototype.
Or you let the participants act out one of
the processes you are trying to improve. You
simulate the real environment to test different
scenarios. Based on your own interactions with
and reactions to this environment, it
may be easier to come up with ideas.
Challenging assumptions is crucial to breaking
through conventional thinking patterns and coming
up with new ideas. A popular ideation technique is
to come up with some of these assumptions inherent
in your design challenge. As a group, you then
go through these assumptions and discuss whether
they are really true, or whether they are just
there because they have never been questioned.
By putting these assumptions to the test, the
team can realize that some assumed features
or strategies are not necessary and what
innovative solutions can be used instead.
It's especially effective to question
assumptions if you're stuck or run out of ideas.
Mind mapping is a visual ideation technique
that makes connections between the problem
your team is trying to solve and possible
solutions. It's perfect for the ideation stage,
as it follows a similar non-linear
approach to brainstorming.
You start by writing a keyword related to your
problem statement. On the same piece of paper,
surround this word with whatever ideas come to
mind. Finally, you will think about how these
ideas are connected, representing the connections
with lines and curves, resulting in a visual map.
This iterative approach can help teams hone ideas
and uncover gaps in the user experience. Using
a mind map allows you to break down big ideas or
problems into smaller, more manageable solutions.
Provocation is a technique of lateral thinking
that challenges the status quo and allows you
to explore new realities to the extreme. In
the simplest terms, a provocation can be seen
as an idea that is considered too radical and
unrealistic even for a brainstorming session.
The purpose of the provocation is to force
your mind out of the worn-out mental pathways,
potentially allowing you to come up
with radical solutions to the problem.
Provocations are best understood
by means of an example.
Suppose the problem you want
to solve is the following:
“Cars run out of petrol after
a few hundred kilometers”
A provocation can be:
Invent a car that pulls a gas station behind it
Invent a car that runs on air
The provocations solve the
problem, but are not realistic.
Make the provocation a good idea through movement.
From the provocation we extract a core idea that
is important in solving the problem. Based on that
principle, we arrive at a more realistic solution.
Let's see how we can deviate
from the sample provocations:
The principle behind the first provocation:
"Invent a car that pulls a gas station",
is that with this solution there is always a
large amount of petrol available for the car.
Possible solutions are to increase the fuel
capacity of cars. Or perhaps a gas station
system where cars can be refueled from mobile
filling stations, such as with airplanes.
The principle behind the second provocation
is that by running the car on air,
you make the fuel the car runs on
immediately available in its environment.
Solutions that make use of this principle are,
for example, adding solar panels to the car for
extra power supply. Or to supplement battery
charging with wind resistance when braking.
Provocations do not lead directly
to a definitive solution, but
they do provide the material from which the new
idea can be formed. The movement technique will
help you question the status quo. Which you can
use to build more viable and realistic ideas.
SCAMPER stands for seven ways
of approaching a problem,
through which you can come up with
ideas from different perspectives.
This technique works well for an existing product
or service to determine how to improve it or use
it as a starting point to develop a new
offering. Ask yourself questions based
on the SCAMPER elements and determine whether
your answers represent viable solutions.
Substitute: What features
of this product or service
can be substituted or swapped for something else?
Combine: How can we combine
this product or service
with another product or service to improve it?
Adapt: How could we adapt this product
or service to another audience?
Modify: What component of this product
or service can we modify to improve it?
Put to another use: What is another use for
this product or service that
we have not considered yet?
Eliminate: What unnecessary elements can we
eliminate from this product
or service to streamline it?
Reverse: What would happen if we reversed
our process or reorganized this product?
By looking at the product or
service from these different angles,
you may arrive at solutions that
you would not otherwise think of.
Storyboarding is an excellent
technique for bringing a design
challenge to life and exploring different
avenues in a visual way. Storyboarding every
step of your process can also be helpful, as
you may realize you missed an essential step.
It is a useful technique when
designing or improving processes.
Participants create a visual story that
presents their ideas and the possible outcomes
of those ideas, helping them understand
what works and what needs improvement.
Track your customer's journey through the process,
including the impact of your solutions. Think of a
storyboard as a comic strip, but don't worry about
artistic skills. Depict each step in the process
with squares filled with text or images describing
the user's journey, and arrows between them.
The worst possible idea technique is great
for putting the group at ease and removing
creative blocks. It often makes for a more fun
environment as participants try to entertain
each other and use their creativity to come up
with ridiculous ideas. Thinking about what's so
terrible about these ideas can provide valuable
insights into what a good idea might look like.
Suppose you are looking for ideas to solve the
problem of traffic congestion in cities.
Very bad ideas are, for example, a global pandemic,
more taxis or the removal of all traffic signs.
If you turn that around, you come
up with better ideas, for example
more working from home, car sharing
or better navigation options.
Reverse thinking is a fun variation to turn
the problem upside down and come up with
new ideas. The solutions you come up with for
the reverse challenge can help you envision
what the opposite could be, bringing you
closer to the solution you really need.
Once the ideation session is complete, it's time
to turn the ideas into concepts for prototyping
and testing. It's not possible to test every
idea, so how do you choose which ideas to pursue?
This is called the "convergent
phase," where ideas are evaluated,
compared, ranked, clustered, and even dumped
to bring together some great ideas to act on.
The following methods can help you select the best
idea at the end of an ideation session:
With dot voting, all members get a number
of votes to choose their favorite ideas.
Ideas generated during the ideation sessions are
written on individual post-its and members can
vote by using stickers or a marker to put a dot on
the post-it corresponding to the ideas they like.
This process allows each member to have an
equal say in choosing from the nominated ideas.
The four categories method encourages you to
consider crazy but meaningful ideas. In this
way the teams can take into consideration
also potentially interesting ideas with
low degree of rationality but
potentially interesting outcomes.
In this method, divide the ideas into 4
categories: most rational, most delightful,
darling and long shot. Then have the team
select a few ideas from each category.
The “rational choice” refers to ideas that are
most logical and provide the
highest amount of utility.
The “most likely to delight” refers to ideas
that will potentially deliver a high
degree of gratification or pleasure.
The “darling” refers to the
evaluators’ favorite ideas.
The “long shot” refers to ideas
that involve a great risk but
equally great rewards if successful.
This method ensures that you cover more
ground and include different types of ideas.
This can be combined with the dot voting method
to choose the winners from each category.
A How, Now, Wow matrix helps groups brainstorm
together, plan ideas and organize their thoughts.
Start by drawing a 2×2 matrix. One
axis indicates the originality of
the idea and the other axis shows the ease
of implementation. Label the quadrants as:
Now. Normal ideas that are easy to implement.
These are low-hanging fruit and solutions
to fill existing gaps in processes. These
typically result in incremental benefits.
How. Original ideas that are impossible to
implement. These are groundbreaking ideas in terms
of impact, but absolutely impossible right now due
to current technological or budgetary constraints.
Wow. Original ideas that are easy to implement.
Wow ideas are those that have the potential for
job-shifting change and are immediately possible.
Place the ideas in the corresponding quadrant.
You can use dot voting to decide which ideas
are best in each quadrant. The ideas with
the most votes move on to the next stage.
The affinity diagram is a method that allows
you to collect large amounts of data and
organize them into groups or themes based on their
relationships. It works best with post-its. Take
one post-it and make it the first of a group. Take
the next post-it and ask, "Is this similar to the
first or different?". Then place it in the first
group or in its own group. The sticky notes allow
the design team to easily hang and move bits of
data to create clusters of similar themes, groups,
and patterns. Name the clusters to help you create
an information structure and discover themes.
Then rank the most important clusters above the
less important clusters or use dot voting to vote.
We covered a lot in this lesson.
Let's summarize all the ideation
methods and techniques we discussed.
The ideation phase represents an important
transition step from getting to know your users
and the problem to coming up with solutions.
The main goal is to discover and
explore new angles and avenues.
To think outside the box, question the obvious,
challenge the norm and come up with new ideas.
To facilitate a fruitful ideation
session, I've shared some best practices.
Change of environment. Get away from the office.
Create a relaxed environment. Make sure
participants feel comfortable and safe.
No judgments - Ideation sessions are not the
place to argue or question other members' ideas.
There are no bad ideas.. Encourage
weird, crazy and wild ideas.
Aim for quantity.
Build on each other's ideas.
Apply structure. Although it is a
creative process, focus is essential.
There are hundreds of ideation techniques
you can use to spark innovative ideas.
At the beginning of the ideation phase, it is good
to opt for techniques that stimulate as many ideas
as possible. At the end, you'll use techniques
that help you explore and test your ideas.
We discussed the most common
ideation techniques, like
Brainstorm
Bodystorming
Challenge Assumptions
Mindmap
Provocation
SCAMPER
Storyboarding
and Worst Possible Idea.
Techniques that help you
select and test your ideas are
Dot voting
Four Categories Method
Now Wow How Matrix
Affinity Maps
Once you've completed the ideation phase,
move on to prototyping and user testing.
This is where you put your ideas to the test and
highlight any kinks that need to be ironed out.
Join me in the next lesson,
where I'll tell you all about it.